---
layout: post
title: "⚖️ Wracker Dev Log #001"
summary: "How I headbutted with Django setup the whole day for it to finally click around midnight"
date: 2023-05-22 23:55:00 +0530
categories:
  - "wracker"
  - "programming"
  - "python"
---

I have been meaning to build my skills in some areas for quite some time, Python, traditional backend frameworks and a bit of full-stack development being a few of them. I decided on building a simple weight-tracking website to learn these things. It had been tossing about in my head for a lot of time, and finally I decided to sit down and start coding it today.

## Day 1 Challenge 1

The first thing to do was to create a directory to store all the code in. Here was the first roadblock I hit, what should the project be named. After contemplating and thinking a lot on it (read 3 minutes max) I decided to go with "Wracker" as it could be seen as a short for "Weight Tracker" and also it is a pun on the word "Wrecker" which I just found hilarious.

## Day 1 Challenge Virtual

Up next was me wanting to install the dependencies for the project without them muddying up my system-wide python packages. I knew of `virtualenv` and have banged my head enough in the past that it only took me 3 tries before I had it nailed down.

## Day 1 Challenging Structure

Since I wanted to use Django framework for this project and I haven't ever used it before, I went to their official getting started guide and was left with a file structure looking something like this after initialising my project.

```text
- Projects
  |- wracker
     |- .gitignore
     |- wracker
        |- manage.py
        |- wracker
           |- __init.py__
           |- asgi.py
           |- settings.py
           |- urls.py
           |- wsgi.py
```

Here I tried running the commands from getting started guide inside a pre-made directory for my project. I could not understand why it needs to create 2 separate subdirectories named the same as the project. This is something I tried understanding multiple times during the day, and we'll back come to it later.

## Challenge Post the SQLite

Django by default uses an SQLite database for storing data, but I wanted to use Postgres. I had already setup a `docker-compose.yaml` file to provision me a postgres database running inside a docker container. While initially the configuration part in Django for Postgres was a bit confusing, I was able to get it working after a bit of fitting in multiple pieces together. I also learned how to use environment variables in Python while dealing with this.

## Challenge of Looking Good

I also wanted a code-formatter for Python and had heard about this one called `black`. Went to the official website, learnt how to use it and then integrate it locally with wracker.

## Challenge of the Day

After looking at all this I would give "Challenge of the Day" award only to the project structure. While none of the official documentation clearly call it out that you need to pass in `.` as the directory to your `django-admin startproject` I did find [an article online](https://automationpanda.com/2018/02/06/starting-a-django-project-in-an-existing-directory/) that clarified it.

## Things I learned/solidified today

- Using `virtualenv` to keep dependencies separate in Python
- How to export your dependencies as a `requirements.txt` file
- Usage of environment variables in Python
- How to create a Django project with reasonable directory structure
- Formatting python code using `black`
- Integrating PostgreSQL with Django instead of the default SQLite database
